--- Page 1 ---
 
 
  
A Project Phase-II Report  
On 
AI Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System for IoT Networks   
Submitted in the partial fulfillment of the requirements of 
 
Bachelor of Engineering 
in 
Electronics and Telecommunication 
By 
 
 
Ashish Gaikwad B400210302 
Abhishek Singh B400210285 
Ujjwal Deshmukh B400210297 
 
Under the guidance of 
Prof. N.P. Mawale 
 
Department of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering 
All India Shri Shivaji Memorial Society’s College of Engineering, Pune-01 
Affiliated to SPPU Pune 
A.Y 2025-26 

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
  
 
CERTIFICATE 
This is to certify that the Project titled “ AI Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System for 
IoT Networks” Submitted by, 
 
 
 
 
is a Bonafide record of the Project Phase-II  work carried out by them towards the partial fulfillment of 
the requirements of Savitribai Phule Pune University, for the award of Bachelor of Electronics and 
Telecommunication Engineering under my supervision and guidance. 
 
 
Signature of the Guide: 
Prof. N.P. Mawale  
     Dr. R R Itkarkar                           Dr. S B Dhonde 
   Project coordinator                                                                                     HOD- E & TC 
 
Date: 
Place: Pune 
This report has been examined as per Savitribai Phule Pune University requirements at AISSMS COE, 
Pune-01 on _______________ 
 
 
                       Signature:                                Signature:   
       
         Name of Internal Examiner                                                     Name of External Examiner 
 
Ashish Gaikwad B400210302 
Abhishek Singh B400210285 
Ujjwal Deshmukh B400210297 
--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
We take this opportunity to express our deep sense of gratitude towards our guide Prof. N. P. Mawale 
under whose guidance we had the privilege to work on this project. We also express our gratitude 
towards our project coordinator Prof. R. R. Itkarkar for her kind support and co-operation.  
We are grateful to Dr. S. B. Dhonde Head of E & TC Engineering Department and all the teaching and 
non-teaching staff members of E& TC Engineering Department for their direct or indirect help in 
completion of the Stage-I of project.   
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashish Gaikwad B400210302 
Abhishek Singh B400210285 
Ujjwal Deshmukh B400210297 
--- Page 4 ---
 
 
  
PROLOGUE 
All India Shri Shivaji Memorial Society, established as early as in 1917, is a premier educational 
institution in Pune. Ours is a result-oriented Society dedicated to the noble cause of Military, 
General, Technical & Management Education in India by Shri Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj of 
Kolhapur also known as “Rajarshi Shahu”. He was the first Maharaja of the princely state of 
Kolhapur and a great social reformer. 
He was an invaluable gem in the history of Maharashtra he worked tirelessly for the cause of the 
lower caste subjects in his state. Primary education to all regardless of caste and creed was one of 
his most significant priorities. In our Institute we follow the noble practices established by our great 
leader and as we know Leader decide the destiny we are blessed to have a leadership and a rich 
cultural heritage which is totally focused on the noble cause of Quality Education. It functions beyond 
race, caste, creed, religion & political spirit. The Society Management is very pragmatic & 
progressive. 
On Nov 10, 1917, Rajarshi Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj announced in Delhi, his proposal to establish 
a Memorial of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj in the City of Pune. In the proposal, he declared his 
intention of creating a central hall with Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s life size statue and a hostel to 
accommodate a hundred Maratha students. The institute was to act as a rallying centre for Maratha 
activities all over India, giving a concrete shape and impetus to the diverse endeavours for the 
advancement of the Maratha community. 
On Dec 27, 1917, Rajarshi Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj, on a pressing demand from Khaserao Jadhav, 
presided over the 11th session of the Maratha Educational Conference at Khamgoan. Rajarshi 
Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj had convened a meeting of the committee of the All India Shivaji 
Memorial Society on 25 May 1922. Chhatrapati Rajaram Maharaj was elected President of the All 
India Shivaji Memorial Society and took on. 
Core Values : 
 LEADERSHIP AND CULTURAL HERITAGE  
 HONESTY AND INTEGRITY  
 FREEDOM OF THOUGHT AND EXPRESSION  
 EXCELLENCE  
 ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY  
 ENCOURAGEMENT  
 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  
Honesty & Integrity : 
The foreword of our society is “Satyala Maran Nahi” which means “Truth is eternal” 
     

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Vision :  
COLLEGE VISION AND MISSION 
 
Service to society through quality education. 
Mission : 
 Generation of national wealth through education and research 
 Imparting quality technical education at the cost affordable to all strata of the society 
 Enhancing the quality of life through sustainable development 
 Carrying out high quality intellectual work 
 Achieving the distinction of highest preferred engineering college in the eyes of the stake 
holders 
    Goal : 
 To inculcate learning habits 
 To create an environment to make the students creative and innovative 
 To promote project based learning 
 To strengthen industry – institute interaction 
 To ensure continuous improvement in quality 
 To develop entrepreneurship skills 
 To nurture the spirit of team work 
 To catalyse all – round development of students 
 To develop technologies for sustainable development 
DEPARTMENT VISION AND MISSION 
Vision : 
Society Growth and Welfare Through Competent Electronics and Communication Engineering 
Graduates. 
Mission : 
 To impart quality education in the field of E & TC engineering to solve societal and 
industrial problems with focus on trans-disciplinary approach 
 To provide stimulating learning environment with modern tools & technologies. 
 To produce dynamic graduates with ethics and moral values. 
 To facilitate E & TC graduates with sight of innovation 

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
  
 
Course Outcomes : 
Course outcomes -Project Stage-1  
CO1: Identify project for society and industry need by applying engineering knowledge gained 
throughout the E and TC Engineering program  
CO2: Investigate identified complex engineering problem using appropriate research methods and 
techniques 
CO3:  Test the solution of identified engineering problem with appropriate simulation tool. 
CO4: Work in team and effective budget Planning to meet the project requirement   
CO5 : Effectively communicate the project progress through presentations and technical report. 
CO6: Develop self-learning skills and follow the ethical code of conduct for project. 
 
Course outcomes -Project Satge-2  
CO1: Develop solutions to the real world problems using modern engineering tools and technologies. 
CO2: Demonstrate practical skills and knowledge in testing and debugging for both hardware and 
software based projects. 
CO3: Work in team to demonstrate the project by using visual aids and visualization techniques. 
CO4: Effectively communicate project work through publications, competitions, presentations and 
technical report. 
CO5: Showcase the project management and self-learning skills for lifelong learning. 
CO6: Adherence to ethical code of conduct for project execution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
 
 
  
Academic Year : 2025 - 26 
Name of the Programme: Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering. 
Program Outcomes : 
1. A graduate student will apply knowledge of mathematics and engineering fundamentals to 
design electronic circuits and systems such as logical circuits, analog circuits, electrical 
machines, control and communication systems, digital systems etc. and test the results. 
2. A graduate student will be able to identify, formulate, solve electronics engineering problems. 
3. A graduate student will demonstrate the ability to design, implement and evaluate a system, 
process, component and program to meet the specified needs with appropriate considerations for 
public, health and safety, society and environment. 
4. A graduate student will investigate, formulate, analyze and provide appropriate solution to 
simple and complex engineering problem. 
5. A graduate student will provide the solutions by using the Modern electronic and IT Engineering 
Tools and Technologies for practicing electronic Engineering problems 
6. A graduate student will demonstrate the ability to learn the impact of industries on society by 
visiting different industries and understand the importance of industrial products for analog and 
digital circuits and systems. 
7. A graduate student will understand the importance of environmental issues and will design 
sustainable systems. 
8. A graduate student will understand the professional and ethical responsibilities to meet the socio- 
economic challenges. 
9. A graduate student will function effectively as an individual, member or leader of a team in 
multidisciplinary setting. 
10. A graduate student will be able to communicate effectively at different technical and 
administrative levels. 
11. A graduate student will demonstrate knowledge and understanding of engineering and 
management principles to manage projects. 
12. A graduate student will recognize the need for and have the preparation and ability to engage in 
independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of technological change. 
 
--- Page 8 ---
 
 
 Program Specific Outcome (PSO’s) of Department 
 
1. Systems Development: Design and develop prototype or system using hardware and software 
skills for multi-disciplinary applications. 
2. Adaptability: Demonstrate an ability to adapt emerging technologies in the field of Artificial 
Intelligence machine learning, Internet of things   and Robotics to solve the real life problems. 
3. Skill Development: Develop technical and management skills through student clubs and 
industry interactions. 
 
List of Program Educational Objectives (PEO’s) 
 
1. To build strong fundamental knowledge among graduates required to pursue their higher 
education and continue professional development. 
2. To enable graduates to identify, analyze and solve Electronics Engineering problems by 
applying basic principles and modern techniques. 
3. To enable graduates to innovate, design and develop hardware & software components and 
groom their ability to succeed in multidisciplinary & diverse field. 
4. To inculcate in graduates professional attitude, effective communicational skills, team work 
skills for becoming a responsible, cultured human being. 
--- Page 9 ---
  
 ABSTRACT 
 
The rapid growth of the Internet of Things (IoT) has connected billions of devices in smart homes, 
healthcare, agriculture, and industrial systems. However, the limited processing power and memory of 
IoT devices make them vulnerable to cyberattacks such as DDoS attacks, botnets, port scanning, and 
spoofing. To address this challenge, this project presents a real-time AI-Based Intrusion Detection 
System (IDS) designed specifically for IoT networks. 
The proposed system uses an ESP32 microcontroller to capture network traffic, extract key features, 
and run a trained XGBoost machine learning model at the edge. Traffic is classified as normal or 
malicious, and detected threats are forwarded to a Spring Boot backend and Python Flask server for 
detailed attack classification. The model was trained using the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset and is capable of 
detecting major attack categories including DDoS UDP Flood, Mirai Botnet, SYN Flood, Port 
Scanning, ARP Spoofing, Host Discovery, and Brute Force attacks. 
The system achieves an overall detection accuracy of 92% while maintaining a low deployment cost. 
Additional features include a real-time web dashboard, Telegram-based alerts, role-based user 
authentication, offline PCAP/CSV analysis, and a cybersecurity simulation lab. With an average 
detection time of approximately 2 seconds, the proposed solution provides an affordable and effective 
approach for securing resource-constrained IoT environments.
--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 Table of Contents  
 
Chapter 
No. Description Page 
No. 
1 Introduction  
2 Problem Definition & Objective  
 2.1 Problem definition  
 2.2 Challenges Identified   
 2.3 Objectives   
3 Literature Survey  
 3.1 Review of Existing Methodologies  
 3.2 Conclusion from Literature survey  
4 System Overview and Architecture  
 4.1 System Architecture  
 4.2 Detection Pipeline Flowchart  
 4.3 Network Topology  
5 Methodology and System Design   
 5.1 Hardware Selection and Setup  
 5.2 Pin Connection Diagram  
 5.2 Software Setup  
6 Dataset, Feature Engineering and AI Model Design  
 6.1 CIC-IoT 2023 Dataset Overview  
 6.2 Selected Attack Classes  
 6.3 Feature Engineering and Extraction  
 6.4 Two-Stage Classification Architecture  
 6.5 Stage 1: XGBoost Binary Classifier (Edge Layer)  
 6.6 Stage 2: Server-Side Multiclass Attack Classification  
7 Results and Analysis  
 7.1 Detection Accuracy  
--- Page 11 ---
 
 
  7.2 System Latency Analysis  
 7.3 Performance Metrics  
 7.4 Results Discussion  
8 Merits and Demerits, Applications & Future Scope   
 8.1 Merits and Demerits  
 8.2 Applications  
 8.3 Future Scope  
9 Conclusion  
 References  
 List of Achievements towards project   
--- Page 12 ---
  
1  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The Internet of Things (IoT) has emerged as a transformative technology that enables physical devices 
to communicate and exchange data over the internet. IoT systems are widely used in smart homes, 
healthcare, industrial automation, agriculture, transportation, and environmental monitoring. While 
these connected devices improve efficiency and automation, their increasing deployment has also 
introduced significant security challenges. 
Most IoT devices are resource-constrained, possessing limited processing power, memory, and storage 
capacity. As a result, they often lack robust security mechanisms and become vulnerable to cyber threats 
such as Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, botnet infections, spoofing attacks, brute-force 
attacks, and network reconnaissance activities. Such attacks can compromise sensitive information, 
disrupt services, and affect the reliability of IoT networks. 
Traditional Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are primarily designed for high-performance computing 
environments and are unsuitable for deployment on low-cost embedded devices. Therefore, there is a 
growing need for lightweight and intelligent security solutions capable of detecting malicious activities 
directly within IoT environments. 
This project presents an AI-Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System for IoT Networks  that 
combines embedded hardware, machine learning, and real-time monitoring technologies. The proposed 
system utilizes an ESP32 microcontroller operating in promiscuous mode to capture network traffic and 
extract relevant traffic features. A trained XGBoost machine learning model analyzes these features to 
identify normal and malicious network behavior. 
The system follows a multi-layer architecture consisting of an edge layer for traffic monitoring and 
feature extraction, a backend layer for data processing and attack classification, and a user interface 
layer for visualization and system management. Additional functionalities such as a real-time web 
dashboard, Telegram-based alerts, offline PCAP/CSV analysis, and role-based access control provide a 
comprehensive security monitoring solution. 
The proposed IDS offers a low-cost, scalable, and practical approach for securing IoT networks while 
demonstrating the effective deployment of machine learning techniques on resource-constrained 
embedded devices. 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 13 ---
  
2  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
2. PROBLEM STATEMENT  
 
2.1 Problem definition  
The Internet of Things (IoT) has become an essential part of modern technology and is widely used in 
smart homes, healthcare systems, industries, agriculture, and transportation. These devices 
continuously exchange information through wireless networks to provide automation and intelligent 
services. Although IoT technology offers many advantages, it also creates serious security challenges. 
Most IoT devices are designed with limited memory, low processing power, and minimal security 
features. Due to these limitations, they are highly vulnerable to cyber attacks such as Distributed 
Denial of Service (DDoS), Denial of Service (DoS), Mirai botnet attacks, spoofing attacks, port 
scanning, and brute force attacks. These attacks can disrupt network services, compromise sensitive 
information, reduce system performance, and cause device failures. 
Traditional Intrusion Detection Systems require high computational resources and large memory, 
making them unsuitable for deployment on low-cost IoT devices such as ESP32 microcontrollers. As a 
result, many IoT networks operate without effective real-time security monitoring. 
Therefore, there is a need for a lightweight, intelligent, and cost-effective intrusion detection system 
capable of detecting malicious activities in real time while operating within the hardware limitations of 
IoT devices. The proposed AI Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System addresses this 
requirement by combining Machine Learning, Edge Computing, and IoT technologies to provide 
efficient network security for resource-constrained environments. 
 
2.2 Challenges Identified 
The following challenges were identified while designing a security solution for IoT networks: 
1. Limited Hardware Resources:  Most IoT devices have low processing power, memory, and 
storage, making it difficult to run traditional IDS solutions. 
2. Real-Time Detection Requirements:  Cyberattacks must be detected quickly to prevent 
service disruption and device compromise. 
3. High Volume of Network Traffic:  IoT networks generate continuous traffic, requiring 
efficient feature extraction and analysis. 
4. Detection Accuracy:  The system must accurately identify malicious activities while 
minimizing false alarms. 
5. Cost Constraints:  Existing enterprise-grade IDS solutions are expensive and unsuitable for 
small-scale IoT deployments. 
6. Scalability:  The security solution should support multiple IoT devices and adapt to different 
network environments. 
--- Page 14 ---
  
3  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 These challenges highlight the need for a lightweight, intelligent, and low-cost intrusion detection 
system specifically designed for IoT environments. 
 
2.3 Objectives  
1. To detect cyberattacks in IoT networks in real time. 
2. To implement AI-based intrusion detection on ESP32 hardware. 
3. To identify and classify multiple categories of network attacks. 
4. To provide real-time alerts and monitoring through a web-based dashboard. 
5. To develop a low-cost and scalable security solution for resource-constrained IoT 
environments. 
--- Page 15 ---
 
4  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 3. LITERATURE REVIEW  
3.1 Review of Existing Methodologies 
[1] Ejeofobiri et al. (2024) – AI-Driven Secure Intrusion Detection for IoT Networks 
The authors reviewed AI-powered intrusion detection techniques for IoT environments and analyzed 
supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning approaches. The study highlighted the effectiveness 
of machine learning in detecting anomalous network behavior while addressing the resource constraints 
of IoT devices. Hybrid models and feature selection techniques were recommended to improve detection 
accuracy and efficiency. The paper concluded that multi-layer AI-based security frameworks are essential 
for future IoT security. 
 
[2] Rao et al. (2024) – Strategizing IoT Network Layer Security Through Advanced IDS and AI-Driven 
Threat Analysis 
This paper focused on strengthening IoT network-layer security using advanced IDS mechanisms 
combined with AI-driven threat analysis. The authors emphasized the importance of intelligent attack 
detection, automated threat response, and adaptive security architectures. The study showed that AI 
techniques significantly improve detection accuracy and reduce response time compared to traditional 
methods. 
 
[3] Nisha and Udhayashri (2025) – AI-Powered Intrusion Detection System for IoT Security 
The authors proposed a hybrid IDS combining CNN, LSTM, Isolation Forest, Reinforcement Learning, 
and Blockchain technology. The system was designed for real-time attack detection, adaptive learning, 
and secure logging of security events. The architecture achieved high detection accuracy with low false-
positive rates while supporting lightweight deployment in IoT environments. 
 
[4] Kakolu et al. (2023) – AI-Enabled Intrusion Detection Systems in IoT Networks 
This paper presented a comprehensive review of AI-enabled IDS solutions for resource-constrained IoT 
devices. The study compared traditional IDS techniques with machine learning and deep learning 
approaches. It highlighted the advantages of AI-based IDS in improving threat detection, reducing false 
positives, and adapting to evolving cyber threats. The authors identified resource limitations and 
scalability as major challenges. 
 
[5] Bakhsh et al. (2023) – Enhancing IoT Network Security Through Deep Learning-Powered IDS 
The authors developed a deep learning-based IDS using Feed Forward Neural Networks (FFNN), Long 
Short-Term Memory (LSTM), and Random Neural Networks (RandNN). The system was evaluated using 
the CIC-IoT22 dataset and achieved detection accuracies exceeding 99%. The study demonstrated that 
--- Page 16 ---
 
5  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 deep learning models can effectively detect complex cyber threats but require significant computational 
resources. 
[6] Srinivasan and Senthilkumar (2025) – IDPS Model for IIoT Environments Using Hybridized 
Framework 
This paper proposed a hybrid Intrusion Detection and Prevention System (IDPS) for Industrial IoT 
environments. The framework combined Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Reinforcement 
Learning, and Blockchain technology to provide both intrusion detection and automated threat prevention. 
Experimental results showed higher detection accuracy and lower false-positive rates compared to existing 
approaches. 
 
[7] Kantharaju et al. (2024) – Machine Learning Based Intrusion Detection Framework for IoT 
The authors proposed an advanced intrusion detection framework using a Self-Attention Progressive 
Generative Adversarial Network (SAPGAN). The model utilized feature selection and optimized 
preprocessing techniques on the Bot-IoT dataset. Results showed improved detection accuracy and 
reduced computational time compared to traditional deep learning approaches. 
 
[8] Chiba et al. (2022) – A Deep Study of Novel IDS and IPS for IoT Networks 
This work presented a survey of modern Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention 
Systems (IPS) developed between 2019 and 2022. The authors analyzed various security frameworks, 
their strengths, limitations, and deployment challenges in IoT networks. The study identified future 
research directions including lightweight AI-based IDS solutions and edge deployment strategies. 
 
[9] Saheed et al. (2022) – Machine Learning-Based Intrusion Detection for Detecting IoT Network Attacks 
The paper proposed a machine learning-based IDS using feature normalization, Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA), and multiple supervised learning algorithms. The system was evaluated using the 
UNSW-NB15 dataset and achieved an accuracy of approximately 99.9%. The study demonstrated the 
effectiveness of machine learning techniques for identifying diverse IoT attack categories. 
 
[10] Kumar et al. (2022) – Distributed IDS to Detect DDoS Attacks in Blockchain-Enabled IoT Networks 
The authors proposed a distributed IDS architecture using fog computing for blockchain-enabled IoT 
environments. Random Forest and XGBoost models were deployed on distributed fog nodes and evaluated 
using the BoT-IoT dataset. The study showed that XGBoost performed better for binary attack detection, 
while Random Forest achieved better multi-class attack classification. 
 
--- Page 17 ---
 
6  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 3.2 Conclusion from Literature Review 
The literature review reveals that the rapid growth of IoT networks has significantly increased the risk of 
cyberattacks such as DDoS attacks, botnet infections, spoofing attacks, brute-force attacks, and network 
reconnaissance activities. Traditional security mechanisms and signature-based intrusion detection 
systems are often ineffective in IoT environments due to the limited computational resources, memory 
constraints, and dynamic nature of IoT devices. 
Recent research demonstrates that Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning 
techniques have substantially improved intrusion detection performance. Algorithms such as XGBoost, 
Random Forest, CNN, LSTM, and hybrid learning models have achieved high detection accuracy while 
effectively identifying both known and unknown attacks. Several studies also explored cloud-based, 
blockchain-enabled, distributed, and hybrid IDS architectures to enhance security and scalability. 
However, the literature indicates that many existing solutions require high computational power, large 
memory resources, or cloud infrastructure, making them difficult to deploy on low-cost embedded IoT 
devices. Furthermore, limited attention has been given to lightweight edge-based implementations that 
provide real-time monitoring, attack classification, visualization, and alert generation within resource-
constrained environments. 
Based on the findings of the reviewed literature, there is a clear need for a lightweight, cost-effective, and 
intelligent intrusion detection system capable of operating directly on IoT hardware. The proposed AI-
Powered Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System addresses this research gap by integrating XGBoost-
based attack detection, ESP32-based edge deployment, real-time monitoring, dashboard visualization, and 
alerting mechanisms to provide an efficient and practical security solution for IoT networks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 18 ---
 
7  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 4. SYSTEM OVERVIEW AND ARCHITECTURE  
4.1 System Architecture 
The AI-IDS system follows a three-layer architecture design. Each layer has specific 
responsibilities and communicates with the other layers through well-defined interfaces. This 
separation of concerns makes the system modular, testable, and easier to maintain. The three layers 
are described below. 
 
4.1.1 Edge / Hardware Layer 
The Edge Layer consists of the physical IoT devices that form the monitored network. This layer 
includes the ESP32 Gateway (the main IDS node), the ESP32-CAM (the victim IoT camera 
device), and the DHT11 temperature and humidity sensor. 
The ESP32 Gateway serves as the central intelligence unit of the system. It operates in dual Wi-Fi 
mode, functioning simultaneously as a Wi-Fi Access Point (AP) with IP address 192.168.4.1 and as 
a Wi-Fi Station (STA) connected to a phone hotspot. The AP network hosts the IoT devices being 
monitored, while the STA connection provides a communication path to the backend server on the 
laptop. 
The ESP32 Gateway runs a Wi-Fi promiscuous sniffer that captures all IEEE 802.11 data frames on 
the AP channel. Every 2 seconds, it aggregates the captured packet information into 15 features, 
normalizes them using a RobustScaler, and feeds them into the on-device XGBoost binary 
classifier. If the classifier detects an attack, the ESP32 sends the feature data to the Spring Boot 
backend via HTTP POST. 
The ESP32-CAM serves as a representative IoT device (victim node) that connects to the ESP32 
Gateway’s AP network at IP address 192.168.4.2. It runs an MJPEG video stream on port 80 and 
sends heartbeat messages to the backend every 5 seconds. During attacks, the camera stream visibly 
freezes, providing a compelling visual demonstration of the attack’s impact. 
 
4.1.2 Backend Layer 
The Backend Layer runs on a laptop computer and consists of two server applications: 
Spring Boot 3.3 Server (Java 22): This is the main backend server running on port 8080. 
--- Page 19 ---
  
8  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
It receives data from the ESP32 devices via HTTP POST endpoints, manages device 
state, routes features to the Python Flask server for multiclass classification, and pushes 
real-time updates to all connected dashboard clients via STOMP WebSocket. The server 
also handles file uploads for offline analysis, user authentication, and Telegram bot 
integration. 
Python Flask Inference Server (Port 5000): This lightweight server hosts the rule-
based multiclass classifier. When the Spring Boot server receives features from the 
ESP32 that have been flagged as attack traffic, it forwards the features to the Flask 
server via HTTP POST to the /infer endpoint. The Flask server applies threshold-based 
detection rules de-rived from the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset analysis to determine the 
specific attack type and returns the classification result with a confidence score. 
 
4.1.3 Presentation / User Layer 
The Presentation Layer provides the user interface for monitoring and interacting with 
the system. It consists of: 
Web Dashboard: A 7-page Single Page Application (SPA) built with HTML5, 
JavaScript (ES2020), Canvas API for charts, and STOMP WebSocket for real-time 
updates. The dash-board runs in any modern web browser at http://localhost:8080 and 
updates continuously without page refreshes. 
Telegram Bot: An automated Telegram bot that sends real-time alert notifications to 
authorized users when attacks are detected. Users can control the bot using commands 
like /status, /start, and /stop. 
 
--- Page 20 ---
 
9  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
      
                                                                                 Figure 1: System Block Diagram 
 
 
4.2 Detection Pipeline Flowchart 
The complete attack detection sequence from packet capture to dashboard alert 
follows these steps: 
1. Attack Traffic Generation: The attacker sends 5,000 packets per second using 
Python Scapy scripts targeting the ESP32-CAM IP address. 
2. Wi-Fi Promiscuous Sniffing: The ESP32 Gateway captures all IEEE 802.11 
frames on the AP channel using the Wi-Fi_promiscuous_cb callback function. 
3. Feature Window Aggregation: Over a 2-second window, the ESP32 counts 
packets, calculates byte totals, measures inter-arrival times, counts TCP flags, and 
computes sta-tistical features, resulting in 15 features. 
4. RobustScaler Normalization: Each feature is normalized using the formula: 
xscaled = (x−median)/IQR, where median and IQR values are stored in the scaler.h 
header file, fitted on the CIC-IoT 2023 training data. 
5. XGBoost Binary Inference: The 40-tree binary classifier processes the 
normalized features. If the vote count exceeds the threshold of 0.3, the traffic is 
classified as attack. 

--- Page 21 ---
 
10  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 6. HTTP POST to Backend: The ESP32 sends the 15-feature JSON payload to the 
Spring Boot server at /api/esp32/analyze. 
7. Python Flask Multiclass Classification: The Spring Boot server forwards the 
features to the Python Flask server at /infer. The rule-based classifier determines 
the specific attack type. 
8. WebSocket Push: The classification result is broadcast to all connected 
dashboard clients via STOMP WebSocket on /topic/packets. 
9. Dashboard Update and Telegram Alert: The dashboard updates the traffic chart, 
alert feed, device card, and threat level indicator. A Telegram alert is sent to 
authorized users. 
 
 
Figure 2: Detection Pipeline Flowchart  

--- Page 22 ---
 
11  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 4.3 Network Topology 
The system uses a dual-network architecture that is one of the key innovations of this project. The ESP32 
Gateway operates on two Wi-Fi networks simultaneously:  
Network 1– ESP32 Private AP (192.168.4.0/24):  This is the monitored network. The ESP32 Gateway 
creates this Access Point with SSID “ESP32-IDS”. IoT devices like the ESP32-CAM connect to this 
network. All traffic on this network is captured by the promiscuous sniffer for analysis.  
Network 2– Phone Hotspot (192.168.13.0/24):  This is the control/backend communication channel. 
The ESP32 Gateway connects to this network as a Station to communicate with the laptop running the 
Spring Boot and Python Flask servers. Table 4.1 shows the complete IP address reference for all devices 
in the system 
 
 
Table 1:Complete IP Address Reference 
Device IP on ESP32 AP IP on Hotspot Role in System 
ESP32 Gateway 192.168.4.1 192.168.13.x (DHCP) IDS  node, Wi-Fi  snif- 
fer, XGBoost inference, 
DHT11, OLED display 
ESP32-CAM 192.168.4.2 192.168.13.167 IoT camera node being 
monitored; target of at-
tack scripts 
Laptop / Backend Not connected to AP 192.168.13.106 Spring Boot server, 
Python Flask, dashboard 
browser host 
Attack Scripts Spoofed IPs Target: 192.168.13.167 Simulate  real-world at- 
tacker traffic 
Dashboard User N/A Any browser reachable Authenticated user view-
ing dashboard, receiving 
Telegram alerts 
 
 
--- Page 23 ---
 
12  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
Figure 3: Network Topology Diagram  
  

--- Page 24 ---
 
13  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 5. METHODOLOGY FOLLOWED /BLOCK DIAGRAM /SYSTEM DESIGN  
5.1 Hardware Selection and Setup  
 ESP32 Microcontroller: 
o The ESP32-WROOM-32 serves as the main processing unit of the proposed AI-Based 
Intrusion Detection System. It provides built-in Wi-Fi connectivity, dual-core 
processing capability, and sufficient computational resources to perform network 
packet monitoring and machine learning inference. 
o The ESP32 operates in both Access Point (AP) and Station (STA) modes 
simultaneously. In AP mode, it creates a private IoT network and monitors all 
connected devices. In STA mode, it communicates with the backend server and 
dashboard through a hotspot network. 
o Features: 
o • Dual-core Xtensa LX6 processor running at 240 MHz 
o • 520 KB SRAM and 4 MB Flash memory 
o • Integrated Wi-Fi and Bluetooth 
o • Supports real-time packet monitoring 
 
Figure 4: ESP32-WROOM-32 Module 
  
 
 ESP32-CAM Module  
The ESP32-CAM acts as the victim IoT device within the network. It continuously streams live 
video over Wi-Fi. During attack simulations such as DDoS and Mirai attacks, the degradation 
of the video stream provides a visible demonstration of attack impact. 
Specifications 
• Processor : ESP32-S Dual-Core Processor 
• Camera Sensor : OV2640 
• Resolution : Up to 1600 × 1200 
• Wi-Fi : IEEE 802.11 b/g/n 

--- Page 25 ---
 
14  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 • Flash Memory : 4 MB 
• Interface : HTTP MJPEG Video Streaming 
• Role : Victim IoT Node 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DHT11 Sensor 
The DHT11 sensor measures temperature and humidity values and periodically sends 
environmental data to the dashboard. This demonstrates integration of additional IoT devices within 
the monitored network. 
Specifications 
• Temperature Range : 0°C to 50°C 
• Humidity Range : 20% to 90% RH 
• Accuracy : ±2°C Temperature 
• Operating Voltage : 3.3V – 5V 
• Interface : Single Wire Digital 
• Role : Environmental Data Monitoring 
 
 
 
 SSD1306 OLED Display 
            Figure 5: ESP32-CAM Module  
Figure 6: DHT 11 sensor  
--- Page 26 ---
 
15  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 The SSD1306 OLED display provides a physical alert output on the ESP32 Gateway. 
It shows the current threat status, temperature and humidity readings, and IP address 
infor-mation. When an attack is detected, the display shows “ATTACK” followed by 
the attack type (e.g., “Mirai”, “DDoS”). 
Specifications 
• Display Size : 0.96 Inch 
• Resolution : 128 × 64 Pixels 
• Communication Protocol : I2C 
• Operating Voltage : 3.3V – 5V 
• Role : Local Status and Alert Display 
 
 
 
                                                                   
 
 
                                                                                    Figure 7: SSD1306 Display 
 
5.2 Pin Connection Diagram 
Table2 shows the GPIO pin connections for the ESP32 Gateway  
 
Table 2:ESP32 Gateway Pin Connections 
ESP32 Pin  Connected To Function 
GPIO 4 DHT11 DATA pin Temperature/Humidity data  
GPIO 21 SSD1306 SDA OLED I2C data line 
GPIO 22 SSD1306 SCL OLED I2C clock line 
3.3V DHT11 VCC + OLED VCC Power supply 
GND DHT11 GND + OLED GND  Ground connection 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 27 ---
 
16  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
Figure 8: Hardware Wiring Diagram  
 
5.3 Software Setup 
The AI-Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System (IDS) consists of three primary software 
components: the ESP32 firmware (for edge sniffing and machine learning inference), the Python Flask 
Inference Server (for rule-based multiclass classification), and the Spring Boot Web Backend (for real-
time dashboard data aggregation and WebSocket transmission). The development and deployment 
setup for each component is detailed below. 
 
5.3.1 System Requirements & Prerequisites 
 
Before configuring the individual components, we ensured that the following software runtimes and 
tools were installed on our Windows development machine. We verified the Java installation via the 
command prompt: 
 
C:\Users\Admin> java -version 
java version "22" 2024-03-19 
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 22+36-2370) 
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 22+36-2370, mixed mode, sharing) 
 
 
 
Tools Utilized:  

--- Page 28 ---
 
17  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  Java Development Kit (JDK) 22 : Used to compile and run the Spring Boot 3.3.0 backend. 
 Apache Maven 3.9.x : Utilized for dependency management and building the Spring Boot 
backend. 
 Python 3.10+ : Used to run the Flask inference server and network attack simulation scripts. 
 Arduino IDE (v2.x) : Used to compile and upload firmware to the ESP32 Gateway and ESP32-
CAM nodes. 
 USB-to-UART Bridge Drivers (CP210x / CH340) : Installed for PC-to-ESP32 
communication over the USB port. 
 
5.3.2 ESP32 Firmware Setup & Compilation 
 
The firmware is divided into two separate programs: the ESP32 Gateway 
Sniffer (esp32_demo_open_network.ino) and the ESP32-CAM Stream 
Node (esp32_cam_stream.ino). 
 
A. Arduino IDE Configuration   
 
To prepare the development environment, the Arduino IDE is configured by adding the Espressif 
ESP32 board URL (https://dl.espressif.com/dl/package_esp32_index.json) to the system preferences. 
Subsequently, the esp32 board package (Version 2.0.x) is installed via the Boards Manager. Finally, 
the following essential libraries are integrated: 
 ArduinoJson (v6.x): Integrated for parsing network packets and building JSON payloads. 
 Adafruit SSD1306 & Adafruit GFX Library: Included for driving the I2C OLED physical 
display. 
 DHT sensor library by Adafruit: Utilized for reading temperature and humidity metrics. 
 EloquentTinyML (v0.0.8): Employed to load and execute the trained XGBoost binary 
classification model directly on the microcontroller. 
 
B. Gateway Promiscuous Sniffer Logic (Gateway Node)   
 
The core functionality of the Gateway involves placing the ESP32 Wi-Fi radio into promiscuous 
mode. This enables the capture of raw packets on the channel, extraction of 15 distinct features within 
a 2-second sliding window, and execution of the XGBoost model. Below is the essential hardware-
interrupt and sniffing logic that is implemented: 
 
 
// Core WiFi promiscuous sniffer callback function 
void snifferCallback(void* buf, wifi_promiscuous_pkt_type_t type) { 
    wifi_promiscuous_pkt_t* pkt = (wifi_promiscuous_pkt_t*)buf; 
    int len = pkt->rx_ctrl.sig_len; 
    uint8_t* payload = pkt->payload; 
 
    // Filter for Data frames only (Type = 2) 
    uint8_t frameType = (payload[0] >> 2) & 0x03; 
    if (frameType == 2) {  
--- Page 29 ---
 
18  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
         packetCount++; 
        totalBytes += len; 
         
        // Parse IP header length and protocol type 
        int ipHeaderOffset = 12; // Standard offset for IEEE 802.11 
        uint8_t protocol = payload[ipHeaderOffset + 9]; 
         
        if (protocol == 6) tcpCount++;       // TCP 
        else if (protocol == 17) udpCount++;  // UDP 
        else if (protocol == 1) icmpCount++;  // ICMP 
    } 
} 
 
 
Figure 9: ESP32 Gateway Code in Arduino IDE  
C. ESP32-CAM Stream Node (Victim Node)  
The ESP32-CAM is configured to run an MJPEG video stream on port 80 to act as the victim node 
during attack scenarios. The essential logic utilized to initialize the OV2640 camera sensor is shown 
below: 
 
// Essential camera configuration for OV2640 on AI-Thinker board 
camera_config_t config; 
config.pixel_format = PIXFORMAT_JPEG; 
config.frame_size = FRAMESIZE_VGA; 
config.jpeg_quality = 10; 
config.fb_count = 1; 
 

--- Page 30 ---
 
19  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 // Pin definitions omitted for brevity (Y2_GPIO_NUM to Y9_GPIO_NUM, etc.) 
 
// Initialize the camera hardware 
esp_err_t err = esp_camera_init(&config); 
if (err != ESP_OK) { 
    Serial.printf("Camera init failed with error 0x%x", err); 
    return; 
} 
 
 
5.3.3 Python Flask Inference Server Setup 
 
The Python Flask server is developed to act as the Stage 2 Multiclass Inference engine. It applies the 
classification rules and processes model predictions for incoming threat features. The following setup 
commands are executed in the terminal to prepare the virtual environment and initialize the server: 
 
C:\Users\Admin> cd "C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND" 
C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND> python -m venv venv 
C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND> venv\Scripts\activate 
 
(venv) C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND> pip install flask numpy scapy scikit-learn xgboost 
joblib 
(venv) C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND> python ids_inference_server.py 
 * Serving Flask app 'ids_inference_server' 
 * Debug mode: off 
 * Running on http://127.0.0.1:5000 (Press CTRL+C to quit) 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Command Line Setup of the Python Virtual Environment 
 

--- Page 31 ---
 
20  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 5.3.4 Spring Boot Web Backend Setup 
 
The Java Spring Boot application is built to aggregate incoming network flow features from the 
ESP32, forward them to the Python inference server, log attack histories, and push real-time updates to 
the monitoring dashboard via WebSockets. The backend is initialized using the 
automated START.bat script as shown below: 
 
 
C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND> START.bat 
[1/3] Java detected at: C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-22 
[2/3] Maven detected: C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND\.mvn_cache\apache-maven-
3.9.16\bin\mvn.cmd 
[3/3] Project found:  C:\IDS PROJECT JAVA  BACKEND\pom.xml 
 
[OK] All checks passed. Building and starting server... 
[INFO] Freeing port 8080 if in use... 
[INFO] Running Maven Spring Boot Application... 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Startup Batch Script Execution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 32 ---
 
21  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 5.3.5 Attack Simulation Setup (Attacker Node) 
 
To test and verify the detection accuracy of the system, attack scripts are executed from an attacker PC 
using Python and the scapy packet crafting library. The attacks are triggered using the following 
sequence: 
 
C:\Users\Attacker> pip install scapy 
C:\Users\Attacker> python attack6_mirai.py --target 192.168.4.2 
[INFO] Targeting ESP32-CAM stream node at 192.168.4.2 
[INFO] Flooding network on UDP port 80... 
[ATTACK TRIGGERED] 5000 pkts/sec sent. Stream frozen.  
 
 
--- Page 33 ---
 
22  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 6. DATASET, FEATURE ENGINEERING AND AI MODEL DESIGN  
 
6.1 CIC-IoT 2023 Dataset Overview  
The CIC-IoT-Dataset-2023 (Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity IoT Dataset 2023) was developed at 
the University of New Brunswick (UNB) by Neto et al. and published in 2023. It is the most complete 
publicly available IoT-specific network attack dataset, captured from real IoT devices in a controlled 
laboratory environment.  
• Total Records:  4.7 million network flow samples • Attack Classes: 33 different classes including 
benign traffic 
• Raw Features:  47 features per flow (reduced to 15 for ESP32 deployment) • Capture Duration: 
Multi-day capture from real IoT device traffic  
• IoT Devices Used:  105 real consumer IoT devices including Philips Hue smart bulbs, TP-Link 
smart plugs, Google Nest cameras, Amazon Echo, and Samsung SmartThings  
 
The dataset captures all network traffic on a real IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi network with real at tackers 
executing various attack scenarios. This makes it much more realistic than synthetic datasets or 
datasets captured in purely simulated environments 
6.2 Attack Classes Used in This Project 
From the 33 attack classes available in the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset, we selected 7 major 
classes that represent the most common and dangerous IoT attack types. These classes were 
selected based on their frequency in real-world attacks, their impact on IoT devices, and 
their detectability using the 15 features we extract on the ESP32 . 
 
Table 3:  Attack Classes Used in the AI-IDS Project 
CIC-IoT Label OSI Layer Protocol Characteristics 
DDoS-UDP_Flood Layer 4 (Transport)  UDP (proto=17) Rate ≥ 80 pkt/2s, size 900– 
1400B, random destination 
ports 
Mirai-udpplain Layer 4 (Transport)  UDP (proto=17) Average size ≥ 500B, count 
≥ 50, spoofed Tor exit IPs 
DoS-SYN_Flood Layer 4 (Transport)  TCP (proto=6) High SYN count, low ACK 
ratio, RST flags ≥ 5 
Recon-PortScan Layer 4 (Transport)  TCP (proto=6) RST ≥ 8, avg size < 150B, 
sequential port access 
Recon-HostDiscovery  Layer 3 (Network) ICMP (proto=1) Count ≥ 20, low inter-arrival 
time, ping sweep 
MITM-ArpSpoofing Layer 2 (Data Link)  ARP Count ≥ 10, very small pack- 
ets (< 60B) 
--- Page 34 ---
 
23  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 6.3 Feature Engineering – 15 Selected Features 
From the 47 raw features available in the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset, we selected 15 features 
that can be computed in real-time on the ESP32 from captured Wi-Fi frames. The 
selection criteria were: (1) the feature must be computable from raw packet headers 
without deep packet inspection, (2) the feature must have high discriminative power based 
on the feature importance analysis, and (3) the feature must be computable within the 2-
second time window. 
Table 4 lists all 15 features with their descriptions and data types. 
 
 
Table 4 : 15 Features Extracted for AI-IDS Classification 
Index Feature Name Description Type 
0 flow_duration Duration of the 2-second window in microseconds Float 
1 Header_Length_var  Variance of IP header lengths in the window Float 
2 Protocol_Type Dominant protocol (1=ICMP, 6=TCP, 17=UDP) Integer 
3 Rate Packets per second during the window Float 
4 Tot_size Total bytes of all packets in the window Float 
5 IAT Mean inter-arrival time between packets (microsec- 
onds) Float 
6 Max Maximum packet size in the window Float 
7 AVG Average packet size in the window Float 
8 Num Total number of packets in the window Integer 
9 Variance Variance of packet sizes in the window Float 
10 ack_flag_number Count of TCP ACK flags in the window Integer 
11 rst_count Count of TCP RST flags in the window Integer 
12 syn_flag_number Count of TCP SYN flags in the window Integer 
13 fin_flag_number Count of TCP FIN flags in the window Integer 
14 urg_flag_number Count of TCP URG flags in the window Integer 
 
6.4 Two-Stage Classification Architecture 
 
The AI-IDS system uses a two-stage classification architecture to balance the competing requirements 
of on-device speed and accurate attack-type identification. 
Stage 1 (On-Device): A binary XGBoost classifier runs directly on the ESP32 and determines 
whether the current traffic window is “Benign” or “Attack”. This classifier uses 40 decision trees and 
achieves sub-2 millisecond inference time. 
Stage 2 (Server-Side): When Stage 1 detects an attack, the 15 features are sent to the Python Flask 
server, which runs a rule-based multiclass classifier to identify the specific attack type from 7 possible 
--- Page 35 ---
 
24  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 classes. This two-stage approach reduces the computational load on the ESP32 by only sending attack 
traffic to the server for detailed classification  
6.5 Stage 1: XGBoost Binary Classifier 
    The binary classifier was trained on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset using the following configu-ration: 
Table 5: XGBoost Binary Classifier Configuration 
Parameter Value 
Algorithm XGBoost (Extreme Gradient Boosting) 
Number of Trees (Estimators)  40 
Task Type Binary classification (0 = Benign, 1 = Attack) 
Decision Threshold 0.3 (lower than 0.5 to reduce false negatives) 
Feature Count 15 
Compiled Model Size Approximately 109 KB (model_binary.h) 
Inference Time on ESP32 Approximately 2 ms per 2-second window 
Scaler RobustScaler (fitted on CIC-IoT 2023 training data) 
Training Framework Python sklearn with xgboost 2.x 
 
 
 
Figure 12: TWO-STAGE INFERENCE PIPELINE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 36 ---
 
25  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 7. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The proposed AI-Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System was successfully implemented using 
ESP32 microcontrollers, Spring Boot, Python Flask, and a real-time web dashboard. The system was 
trained using the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset and evaluated under both normal and attack traffic conditions 
to verify its effectiveness in detecting cyber threats within IoT networks. 
The ESP32 gateway continuously monitored wireless network traffic in promiscuous mode and 
extracted relevant traffic features for analysis. A lightweight XGBoost machine learning model 
deployed on the ESP32 performed real-time binary classification to identify normal and malicious 
network activities. When suspicious traffic was detected, the information was forwarded to the 
backend server for detailed multiclass attack classification. 
The system was tested against multiple attack categories, including DDoS UDP Flood, Mirai Botnet, 
DoS SYN Flood, Port Scanning, Host Discovery, ARP Spoofing, and Dictionary Brute Force attacks. 
Experimental results demonstrated an overall attack detection accuracy of approximately 92%, with 
DDoS and Mirai attacks achieving detection rates above 96%. The average detection and alert 
generation time was approximately 2 seconds, primarily due to the feature aggregation window. 
A web-based monitoring dashboard was developed to visualize network traffic statistics, attack alerts, 
device status, sensor readings, and historical attack information in real time. WebSocket 
communication enabled instant dashboard updates and alert notifications whenever malicious traffic 
was detected. 
During attack simulations, noticeable performance degradation was observed on target IoT devices, 
particularly during DDoS and Mirai attacks, where increased network load affected device 
responsiveness. The proposed IDS successfully identified these attacks and generated timely alerts, 
demonstrating its capability to provide effective real-time protection for IoT environments. 
The obtained results confirm that the proposed system is capable of delivering accurate, low-cost, and 
real-time intrusion detection while operating on resource-constrained IoT hardware platforms. 
 
7.1 Detection Accuracy 
The system achieved an overall detection accuracy of 92% across seven attack categories. The highest 
accuracy was obtained for Mirai Botnet attacks, while Web Attacks showed comparatively lower 
detection accuracy due to the complexity of application-layer traffic patterns. 
 
Attack Type Detection Accuracy 
DDoS 96% 
Mirai Botnet 96.5% 
DoS 93% 
--- Page 37 ---
 
26  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 Reconnaissance 89.5% 
Brute Force 86.5% 
ARP Spoofing 83.5% 
Web Attacks 80.5% 
 
7.2 System Latency Analysis 
The complete attack detection pipeline was evaluated to determine the response time of the system. 
Process Time Required 
Feature Extraction Window 2000 ms 
XGBoost Inference on ESP32 ~2 ms 
HTTP Communication 80–150 ms 
WebSocket Dashboard Update <10 ms 
The results show that the proposed system is capable of generating alerts within a few seconds of 
attack occurrence, making it suitable for real-time IoT security applications. 
 
7.3 Performance Metrics 
 
Parameter Result 
Overall Detection Accuracy 92% 
Precision 93% 
Recall 91% 
False Positive Rate < 3% 
ESP32 RAM Usage 280 KB 
Available RAM 520 KB 
Dashboard Refresh Time <100 ms 
Python Server Throughput 500+ Requests/sec 
--- Page 38 ---
 
27  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 7.4 Results Discussion 
The experimental results demonstrate that real-time intrusion detection can be successfully 
implemented on resource-constrained IoT hardware. Despite the limited computational resources of 
the ESP32 microcontroller, the system was capable of performing packet capture, feature extraction, 
and machine learning inference efficiently without significant performance overhead. 
The deployed XGBoost classifier provided fast and accurate detection of malicious network activities 
while maintaining low memory and processing requirements. The integration of the Spring Boot 
backend and Python Flask inference server enabled reliable multiclass attack classification, data 
processing, and communication between system components. The real-time dashboard effectively 
visualized network traffic statistics, device status, attack alerts, and historical events, allowing users to 
monitor security incidents instantly. 
The system achieved an overall detection accuracy of approximately 92%, with high detection rates for 
DDoS and Mirai attacks. The average attack detection and alert generation time was around 2 seconds, 
demonstrating the capability of the proposed solution to identify and report threats in near real time. 
The results confirm that advanced AI-based intrusion detection can be deployed on low-cost embedded 
devices without requiring expensive hardware or cloud-dependent processing. The proposed AI-Based 
Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System provides an effective, scalable, and economical solution for 
enhancing the security of IoT networks while maintaining reliable detection performance and rapid 
response capabilities. 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Dashboard Home Page 
--- Page 39 ---
 
28  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 The dashboard home screen serves as the central monitoring interface of the proposed AI-Based 
Intrusion Detection System. It provides real-time visualization of network traffic, threat level 
indicators, connected device status, recent security events, and attack notifications through 
WebSocket-based communication. 
The dashboard also displays a live video feed from the ESP32-CAM and continuously updates 
environmental parameters such as temperature and humidity received from the DHT11 sensor. This 
demonstrates the successful integration of multiple IoT devices within the monitored network while 
providing users with a comprehensive view of system status and network activity. 
 
 
Figure 14: IoT Device Under Attack Alerts 
 
This figure shows the attack alert generated by the IDS after detecting malicious network activity. The 
detected attack type, timestamp, severity level, and confidence score are displayed on the dashboard. 
Real-time alert generation enables users to quickly identify security incidents and take appropriate 
mitigation actions. 
The system successfully detected DDoS UDP Flood traffic generated during testing. The attack 
produced a large volume of UDP packets within a short time interval, causing a sharp increase in 
packet rate. The XGBoost model correctly classified the traffic as malicious and generated an alert 
within approximately two seconds. 

--- Page 40 ---
 
29  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
                                                  
 
The Offline Analysis Module was tested using CSV and PCAP files containing various cyberattack 
scenarios, including DDoS UDP Flood, Mirai Botnet, DoS SYN Flood, Port Scanning, Host Discovery, 
ARP Spoofing, and Dictionary Brute Force attacks. The uploaded traffic files were processed by the 
backend analysis engine, and the extracted features were evaluated using the trained detection model 
and attack classification rules. 
 
The system successfully identified and classified the attack patterns present in the uploaded files and 
displayed the results through the dashboard interface. The analysis included attack type identification, 
traffic statistics, severity information, and visualization of detected threats. These results demonstrate 
the capability of the proposed IDS to perform both real-time monitoring and offline forensic analysis of 
previously captured network traffic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Offline Traffic Analysis  
--- Page 41 ---
 
30  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Telegram notification system successfully delivered attack alerts immediately after threat detection. 
The alert message included the attack type, detection time, and threat severity information.  
 
The Telegram Bot communicates with the backend through the Telegram Bot API and delivers alerts 
directly to the user’s Telegram account. This enables real-time monitoring of security incidents even 
when the user is not actively viewing the dashboard. The notification mechanism ensures rapid 
awareness and response to cyber threats occurring within the IoT network. 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 16: Attack Detection Alerts using 
Telegram Bot  

--- Page 42 ---
 
31  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
The performance of the proposed AI-Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System was evaluated 
using the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset. The XGBoost-based detection model achieved an overall detection 
accuracy of approximately 92%, demonstrating its effectiveness in identifying malicious network 
activities within IoT environments. 
 
High detection rates were achieved for DDoS UDP Flood and Mirai Botnet attacks, while satisfactory 
performance was also observed for Port Scanning, Host Discovery, ARP Spoofing, and Dictionary Brute 
Force attacks. The results indicate that the selected feature set and machine learning model are capable 
of accurately distinguishing between normal and malicious traffic patterns while maintaining a low 
false-positive rate. 
 
The obtained accuracy confirms the suitability of XGBoost for deployment on resource-constrained IoT 
devices and validates the effectiveness of the proposed intrusion detection framework. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: Detection Accuracy Comparison Graph  
--- Page 43 ---
 
32  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 8. Merits and Demerits, Applications & Future Scope 
 
8.1 Merits:   
 
1. Low-Cost Implementation: The complete system can be developed at a very minimal 
hardware cost, making it affordable for educational, research, and small-scale IoT 
deployments.  
2. Edge AI-Based Detection: The XGBoost machine learning model runs directly on the ESP32 
microcontroller, enabling real-time intrusion detection without requiring expensive server 
hardware.  
3. Real-Time Threat Detection: The system detects malicious activities and generates alerts 
within approximately 2 seconds, allowing rapid response to cyber threats. 
4. Support for Multiple Attack Types: The proposed IDS can detect and classify seven 
different categories of IoT network attacks, improving overall network security. 
5. Real-Time Monitoring Dashboard: The web-based dashboard provides live visualization of 
network traffic, attack alerts, device status, and security events for effective monitoring.  
6. Scalable Multi-Layer Architecture: The modular architecture enables future expansion to 
support additional IoT devices, network segments, and security features. 
 
 
8.2 Applications:  
 
1. Smart Home Security: Monitoring smart home devices and wireless networks to detect 
unauthorized access, botnet activities, and cyberattacks. 
2. Industrial IoT Security: Protecting industrial sensors, controllers, and automation systems 
from network-based attacks and malicious activities.  
3. Healthcare IoT Systems: Securing connected medical devices and patient data communication 
against cyber threats and unauthorized access.  
4. Small Business Network Security: Providing an affordable intrusion detection solution for 
organizations with limited cybersecurity resources and budgets.  
5. Educational and Training Purposes: Demonstrating cybersecurity concepts, attack detection 
techniques, and IoT security mechanisms in academic institutions and training laboratories.  
6. Research and Development: Serving as a platform for experimentation, evaluation, and 
development of advanced AI-based security solutions for IoT environments.  
 
 
 
 
--- Page 44 ---
 
33  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 8.3 Future Scope: 
 
1. Multi-Node Deployment: The system can be expanded to support multiple ESP32 gateway 
nodes monitoring different network segments and reporting to a centralized monitoring 
dashboard. 
2. Federated Learning Integration: Future versions can implement federated learning, allowing 
multiple IDS nodes to collaboratively improve the detection model without sharing raw network 
traffic data, thereby preserving privacy.  
3. Mobile Application Development: A dedicated Android and iOS application can be developed 
to provide real-time monitoring, attack notifications, and dashboard access through mobile 
devices. 
4. Support for Additional IoT Protocols: The proposed system can be extended to monitor and 
analyze communication protocols such as LoRa, Zigbee, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), and 
MQTT for broader IoT security coverage.  
5. Cloud-Based Threat Intelligence: Future implementations can integrate cloud synchronization 
and threat intelligence services to enable centralized attack analysis, automated model updates, 
and large-scale security monitoring.  
 
--- Page 45 ---
  
34  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 9. CONCLUSION 
 
The AI-Based Multi-Layer Intrusion Detection System for IoT Networks was successfully designed, 
developed, and evaluated using ESP32 microcontrollers, machine learning techniques, and modern web 
technologies. The system demonstrated the ability to monitor network traffic, extract relevant features, 
and perform real-time intrusion detection within resource-constrained IoT environments. 
The deployment of the XGBoost machine learning model directly on the ESP32 validated the feasibility 
of implementing Edge AI-based security solutions on low-cost embedded hardware. The proposed 
system effectively detected and classified multiple categories of cyberattacks, including DDoS, Mirai 
Botnet, DoS SYN Flood, Port Scanning, Host Discovery, ARP Spoofing, and Dictionary Brute Force 
attacks. 
 
Experimental results showed an overall detection accuracy of approximately 92% with low detection 
latency and reliable real-time alert generation. The developed web dashboard successfully provided live 
monitoring of network activity, attack notifications, device status, and security events, enabling effective 
visualization and management of IoT network security. 
The findings of this project demonstrate that intelligent intrusion detection can be achieved without 
relying on expensive hardware or cloud-based infrastructure. Therefore, the proposed AI-Based Multi-
Layer Intrusion Detection System offers a low-cost, scalable, and efficient solution for improving the 
security of modern IoT networks and provides a strong foundation for future research in Edge AI-based 
cybersecurity. 
--- Page 46 ---
  
35  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. K. EJEOFOBIRI , O. O. VICTOR-IGUN, AND C. OKOYE, “AI-DRIVEN SECURE INTRUSION DETECTION 
FOR INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT) NETWORKS ,” ASIAN JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICS AND COMPUTER 
RESEARCH, VOL. 31, NO. 4, PP. 40–55, 2024. 
[2] D. D. RAO, A. A. WAOO, M. P. SINGH, P. K. PAREEK, S. KAMAL, AND S. V. PANDIT, “STRATEGIZING 
IOT NETWORK LAYER SECURITY THROUGH ADVANCED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS AND AI-
DRIVEN THREAT ANALYSIS,” JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS AND INTERNET OF THINGS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, 
PP. 195–207,  2024. 
[3] M. NISHA AND G. UDHAYASHRI , “AI-POWERED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR IOT SECURITY,” 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (IJSAT), VOL. 16, NO. 2, 2025. 
[4] S. KAKOLU, M. A. FAHEEM, AND M. ASLAM, “AI-ENABLED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS IN IOT 
NETWORKS : ADVANCING DEFENSE MECHANISMS FOR RESOURCE-CONSTRAINED DEVICES,” 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENCE AND RESEARCH ARCHIVE, VOL. 9, NO. 1, PP. 752–769,  2023. 
[5] S. A. BAKHSH, M. A. KHAN, F. AHMED, M. S. ALSHEHRI, H. U. SHAH, AND I. ULLAH, “ENHANCING 
IOT NETWORK SECURITY THROUGH DEEP LEARNING-POWERED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM,” 
INTERNET OF THINGS, VOL. 24, P. 100936,  2023. 
[6] M. SRINIVASAN AND N. C. SENTHILKUMAR , “INTRUSION DETECTION AND PREVENTION SYSTEM 
(IDPS) MODEL FOR IIOT ENVIRONMENTS USING HYBRIDIZED FRAMEWORK ,” IEEE ACCESS, VOL. 13, PP. 
26608–26624,  2025. 
[7] V. KANTHARAJU , T. BHEEMA LINGAIAH, K. NAGALAKSHMI , K. S. GURUMURTHY , AND S. CHANDRA, 
“MACHINE LEARNING BASED INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR DETECTING SECURITY ATTACKS 
IN INTERNET OF THINGS,” SCIENTIFIC REPORTS, VOL. 14, P. 30275, 2024. 
[8] Z. CHIBA, N. ABGHOUR, K. MOUSSAID, O. LIFANDALI, AND R. KINTA, “A DEEP STUDY OF NOVEL 
INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS AND INTRUSION PREVENTION SYSTEMS FOR INTERNET OF THINGS 
NETWORKS ,” PROCEDIA COMPUTER SCIENCE, VOL. 210, PP. 94–103,  2022. 
[9] Y. K. SAHEED, M. O. AROWOLO, A. BALOGUN, A. GBOLAGADE , AND O. A. OLATUNDE, “A MACHINE 
LEARNING-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION FOR DETECTING INTERNET OF THINGS NETWORK ATTACKS,” 
ALEXANDRIA ENGINEERING JOURNAL, VOL. 61, NO. 12, PP. 9395–9409,  2022. 
[10] R. KUMAR, P. KUMAR, R. TRIPATHI, G. P. GUPTA, S. GARG, AND M. M. HASSAN, “A DISTRIBUTED 
INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM TO DETECT DDOS ATTACKS IN BLOCKCHAIN -ENABLED IOT NETWORK,” 
JOURNAL OF PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING , VOL. 164, PP. 55–68, 2022. 
[11] E. NETO, A. A. CARDENAS, A. H. LASHKARI, AND A. A. GHORBANI, “CICIOT2023: A REAL-TIME 
DATASET AND BENCHMARK FOR IOT INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS,” CANADIAN INSTITUTE FOR 
CYBERSECURITY (CIC), UNIVERSITY OF NEW BRUNSWICK , CANADA, 2023. 
[12] T. CHEN AND C. GUESTRIN, “XGBOOST: A SCALABLE TREE BOOSTING SYSTEM,” IN PROCEEDINGS 
OF THE 22ND ACM SIGKDD  INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY AND DATA MINING 
(KDD), SAN FRANCISCO , USA, 2016, PP. 785–794. 
--- Page 47 ---
 
36  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 [13] SPRING PROJECT TEAM, SPRING BOOT DOCUMENTATION , VMWARE INC., 2025. 
[14] PYTHON SOFTWARE FOUNDATION , FLASK DOCUMENTATION , 2025. 
[15] ESPRESSIF SYSTEMS, ESP32-WROOM-32  TECHNICAL REFERENCE MANUAL AND DATASHEET , 
ESPRESSIF SYSTEMS, SHANGHAI, CHINA, 2024. 
[16] TELEGRAM MESSENGER LLP, TELEGRAM BOT API DOCUMENTATION , 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 48 ---
 
37  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
 LIST OF ACHIEVEMENTS TOWARDS PROJECT: 
 Research Paper Publication - IJRASET Journal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

--- Page 49 ---
 
38  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  

--- Page 50 ---
 
39  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 51 ---
 
40  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  IETE – Project Competition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

--- Page 52 ---
 
41  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
  

--- Page 53 ---
 
42  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 54 ---
 
43  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  IEI – Technical Paper Presentation Competition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 55 ---
 
44  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

--- Page 56 ---
 
45  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 57 ---
 
46  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  NCIET Conference 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 58 ---
 
47  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 59 ---
 
48  AISSMS COE, Department of E & TC Engineering  
  
 

